PS-9003 Add pro-builds and FIPS documentation (8.0) (#211)
percona/psmysql-docs: docs/fips.md

# FIPS compliance

The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are a set of U.S. government standards that ensure the security of computer systems for non-military government agencies and contractors. These standards specify how to perform cryptographic operations, such as encryption, hashing, and digital signatures. FIPS mode is a mode of operation that enforces these standards and rejects any non-compliant algorithms or parameters.

> Percona Server for MySQL implements the same level of FIPS support as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL can run in FIPS mode if a FIPS-enabled OpenSSL library and FIPS Object Module are available at runtime or if compiled using a compliant version of OpenSSL. You can also receive this functionality by [building Percona Server for MySQL from source code](compile-percona-server.md).

Reviewer: compiled using a FIPS-validated version of OpenSSL.

Author: fixed

Percona Server for MySQL uses the same variables and values as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL enables control of FIPS mode on the server side and the client side:

* The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable controls whether the server operates in FIPS mode. This variable is disabled by default.

    The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable has these values:

    * `0` - disables FIPS mode
    * `1` - enables FIPS mode
    * `2` - enables `strict` FIPS mode

* The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option controls whether a given MySQL client operates in FIPS mode. This setting does not change the server setting. This option is disabled by default.

    The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option has these values:

    * `OFF` - disables FIPS mode
    * `ON` - enables FIPS mode

>     * `STRICT` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the `ON` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `ON` or `STRICT` depends on the OpenSSL version.

Reviewer: Include the STRICT definition in the server version.

Author: added

     
    Note that the MySQL server does not read the OpenSSL configuration file unless the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is set to `ON` or `STRICT`. The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is read-only and cannot be changed at runtime.
  

>     To enable the FIPS mode, pass `--ssl-fips-mode=ON` to mysqld as a command line argument. Ignore the warning that the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is deprecated. To ensure that the FIPS mode is enabled, check that the error log contains the following message:

Reviewer: Make this a separate section

## Check FIPS Mode

Author: updated

# FIPS compliance

The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are a set of U.S. government standards that ensure the security of computer systems for non-military government agencies and contractors. These standards specify how to perform cryptographic operations, such as encryption, hashing, and digital signatures. FIPS mode is a mode of operation that enforces these standards and rejects any non-compliant algorithms or parameters.

Percona Server for MySQL implements the same level of FIPS support as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL can run in FIPS mode if a FIPS-enabled OpenSSL library and FIPS Object Module are available at runtime or if compiled using a FIPS-validated version of OpenSSL. You can also receive this functionality by [building Percona Server for MySQL from source code](compile-percona-server.md).

Percona Server for MySQL uses the same variables and values as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL enables control of FIPS mode on the server side and the client side:

> * The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable controls whether the server operates in FIPS mode. This variable is disabled by default.

Reviewer 2: As this system variable became deprecated and read-only in MySQL8.0.34 it no longer "controls" whether the server operates in FIPS mode, just "shows".
To "control", the "--ssl-fops-mode" server command line option should be used

Author: updated

    The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable has these values:

    * `0` - disables FIPS mode
    * `1` - enables FIPS mode
    * `2` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the  `1 ` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `1` or `2` depends on the OpenSSL version.

* The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option controls whether a given MySQL client operates in FIPS mode. This setting does not change the server setting. This option is disabled by default.

>     The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option has these values:

Reviewer 2: The same set of values for `--ssl-fips-mode` is used for both server and client command line option.

Author: updated

    * `OFF` - disables FIPS mode
    * `ON` - enables FIPS mode
    * `STRICT` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the `ON` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `ON` or `STRICT` depends on the OpenSSL version.
     

>     Note that the MySQL server does not read the OpenSSL configuration file unless the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is set to `ON` or `STRICT`. The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is read-only and cannot be changed at runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Note that whether MySQL server operates in FIPS mode does not depend on which crypto module (regular or FIPS-approved) is configured as the default in the OpenSSL configuration file.  The server always respects the value of `--ssl-fips-mode` server command line option (`OFF`, `ON`, or `STRICT`). The `ssl_fips_mode` global system variable is read-only and cannot be changed at runtime.
```

Author: updated

>     To enable the FIPS mode, pass `--ssl-fips-mode=ON` to mysqld as a command line argument. Ignore the warning that the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is deprecated. 

Reviewer 3: Or set in configuration file.

Author: Updated

    
    ### Check FIPS mode

>     To ensure that the FIPS mode is enabled, check that the error log contains the following message:

Reviewer 3: when log-error-verbosity=3

Author: Updated

    * `OFF` - disables FIPS mode
    * `ON` - enables FIPS mode
    * `STRICT` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the `ON` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `ON` or `STRICT` depends on the OpenSSL version.
     
    Note that the MySQL server does not read the OpenSSL configuration file unless the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is set to `ON` or `STRICT`. The `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is read-only and cannot be changed at runtime.
  
    To enable the FIPS mode, pass `--ssl-fips-mode=ON` to mysqld as a command line argument. Ignore the warning that the `--ssl-fips-mode` client option is deprecated. 
    
    ### Check FIPS mode

    To ensure that the FIPS mode is enabled, check that the error log contains the following message:

    ```{.text .no-copy}
    A FIPS-approved version of the OpenSSL cryptographic library has been detected in the operating system with a properly configured FIPS module available for loading. Percona Server for MySQL will load this module and run in FIPS mode.
    ```

> Find more information in the [Configure MySQL for FIPS](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/fips-mode.html) document.

Reviewer: You can remove this link to MySQL.

Author: removed

# FIPS compliance

> FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standard) is the US government computer security standard for cryptography modules that include both hardware and software components. Percona Server for MySQL supports FIPS certified module for OpenSSL, enabling US organizations to introduce FIPS-compliant encryption and thus meet the requirements towards data security.  

Reviewer: The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are a set of U.S. government standards that ensure the security of computer systems for non-military government agencies and contractors. These standards specify how to perform cryptographic operations, such as encryption, hashing, and digital signatures. FIPS mode is a mode of operation that enforces these standards and rejects any non-compliant algorithms or parameters.

Author: Updated

> FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standard) is the US government computer security standard for cryptography modules that include both hardware and software components. Percona Server for MySQL supports FIPS certified module for OpenSSL, enabling US organizations to introduce FIPS-compliant encryption and thus meet the requirements towards data security.  

Reviewer: Percona Server for MySQL can run in FIPS mode if a FIPS-enabled OpenSSL library and FIPS Object Module are available at runtime or if compiled using a compliant version of OpenSSL.

Author: Updated

Percona Server for MySQL implements the same level of FIPS support as MySQL. You can also receive this functionality by [building Percona Server for MySQL from source code](compile-percona-server.md).

> See [Configure MySQL for FIPS](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/fips-mode.html) in MySQL documentation for configuration guidelines. 

Reviewer: Ask what the variables are and the parameters.

Author: Updated

    * Debian 12

    * Ubuntu 22.04 Pro (the OpenSSL FIPS 140-3 certification is under implementation)

        !!! note
            
            If you enable FIPS on Ubuntu Pro with `$ sudo pro enable fips-updates` and then disable FIPS with `$ sudo pro disable fips-updates`, Percona Server for MySQL may stop operating properly. For example, if you disable FIPS on Ubuntu Pro with `$ sudo pro disable fips-updates` and enable the FIPS mode on Percona Server with `ssl-fips-mode=ON`, Percona Server may not load the SSL certificate.

* Deploy [Percona Server for MySQL from the Pro build](psmysql-pro.md), which is built and tested on operating systems with FIPS pre-approved OpenSSL packages.

## The FIPS mode variables

Percona Server for MySQL uses the same variables and values as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL enables control of FIPS mode on the server side and the client side:

* The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable shows whether the server operates in FIPS mode. This variable is disabled by default.

    The `ssl_fips_mode` system variable has these values:

    * `0` - disables FIPS mode
    * `1` - enables FIPS mode

>     * `2` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the  `1 ` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `1` or `2` depends on the OpenSSL version.

Reviewer: The exact behavior of the `strict` FIPS mode depends on the OpenSSL version. The server only specifies the FIPS value to OpenSSL.

* The `--ssl-fips-mode` client/server option controls whether a given MySQL client operates in FIPS mode. This setting does not change the server setting. This option is disabled by default.

    The `--ssl-fips-mode` client/server option has these values:

    * `OFF` - disables FIPS mode
    * `ON` - enables FIPS mode

>     * `STRICT` - enables `strict` FIPS mode. This value provides more restrictions than the `ON` value. However, MySQL itself does not have any FIPS-specific code other than to specify the FIPS mode value to OpenSSL. The exact behavior of FIPS mode for `ON` or `STRICT` depends on the OpenSSL version.

Reviewer: Same as above.
We don't know if any restrictions are applied to the client because that's dependent on the OpenSSL version.

     
    The MySQL server operation in FIPS mode does not depend on which crypto module (regular or FIPS-approved) is set as the default in the OpenSSL configuration file. The server always respects the value of `--ssl-fips-mode` server command line option (`OFF`, `ON`, or `STRICT`). The `ssl_fips_mode` global system variable is read-only and cannot be changed at runtime.
  
### Enable the FIPS mode

> To enable the FIPS mode, pass `--ssl-fips-mode=ON` to mysqld as a command line argument or add `ssl-fips-mode=ON` to the configuration file. Ignore the warning that the `--ssl-fips-mode` client/server option is deprecated.

Reviewer 3: --ssl-fips-mode can also be STRICT. `--ssl-fips-mode=ON` or `--ssl-fips-mode=STRICT`

The Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are a set of U.S. government standards that ensure the security of computer systems for non-military government agencies and contractors. These standards specify how to perform cryptographic operations, such as encryption, hashing, and digital signatures. FIPS mode is a mode of operation that enforces these standards and rejects any non-compliant algorithms or parameters.

Percona Server for MySQL implements the same level of FIPS support as MySQL. Percona Server for MySQL can run in FIPS mode if a FIPS-enabled OpenSSL library and FIPS Object Module are available at runtime or if compiled using a FIPS-validated version of OpenSSL. You can also receive this functionality by [building Percona Server for MySQL from source code](compile-percona-server.md).

## Prerequisites

To prepare Percona Server for MySQL for FIPS certification, do the following:

* Check that your operating system includes FIPS pre-approved OpenSSL library in version 3.0.x or higher. The following distributions includes FIPS pre-approved OpenSSL library in version 3.0.x or higher:

    * RedHat Enterprise Linux 9

>     * Oracle Linux 9

Reviewer 3: >    * RedHat Enterprise Linux 9

>    * Oracle Linux 9

@percona-ysorokin maybe it is better to write RedHat Enterprise Linux 9 and derivatives here?

Reviewer 2: @eleo007 In general I agree, we should. But have we ever tested this on real RHEL9?

Reviewer 3: I have tested on OL9
